---
title: TRENDS 2017
parent: TRENDS
layout: default
redirect_from: events/workshops/trends/2017
---

# The 6th IFIP WG 1.8 Workshop on Trends in Concurrency Theory

September 9, 2017, Berlin, Germany  
A satellite event of CONCUR 2017

## Description

TRENDS 2016 is an event organised by IFIP WG 1.8 on Concurrency Theory. It aims at bringing together researchers interested in Concurrency Theory and its applications, to exchange ideas and discuss recent trends and open problems. The event will take place on September 9, 2017 and will consist of two invited talks, a number of highlight presentations. It will be associated with the yearly WG 1.8 business meeting.

## Program

* 09:00-09:45 Invited Talk: Marieke Huisman, University of Twente, The Netherlands

  Title: A Verification Technique for Deterministic Parallel Programs

  Abstract: A commonly used approach to develop parallel programs is to augment a sequential program with compiler directives that indicate which program blocks may potentially be executed in parallel. This talk presents a verification technique to prove correctness of compiler directives combined with functional correctness of the program. We propose syntax and semantics for a simple core language, capturing the main forms of deterministic parallel programs. This language distinguishes three kinds of basic blocks: parallel, vectorized and sequential blocks, which can be composed using three different composition operators: sequential, parallel and fusion composition. We show that it is sufficient to have contracts for the basic blocks to prove correctness of the compiler directives, and moreover that functional correctness of the sequential program implies correctness of the parallelized program. We formally prove correctness of our approach. In addition, we define a widely-used subset of OpenMP that can be encoded into our core language, thus effectively enabling the verification of OpenMP compiler directives, and we discuss automated tool support for this verification process.

* 09:45-10:10 Javier Esparza, Static Analysis of Deterministic Negotiations

* 10:10-10:35 Ana Sokolova, Convex Algebras for Probabilistic Systems  

* 10:35-11:00 Antonin Kucera, Efficient Algorithms for Checking Fast Termination in VASS  

* 11:00-11:45 Coffee / Tea Break

* 11:45-12:10 Paola Giannini, Delegation for Global Types (Based on ongoing work with Ilaria Castellani and Mariangiola Dezani-Ciancaglini) 

* 12:10-12:35 Ugo Montanari, Decomposition Structures for Soft Constraint Evaluation Problems

* 12:35-13:00 Rob van Glabbeek, Ensuring Liveness Properties of Distributed Systems 

* 13:00-14:00 Lunch   

* 14:00-14:45 Invited Talk: Jan Peleska, University of Bremen, Germany 

  Title: Trends in Concurrency Theory - the Tester's Perspective

  Abstract: In recent years, new paradigms for distributed systems have indicated the need for extending the semantic foundations of concurrency. This need arose in very different domains, such as multi-core technologies, cyber-physical systems, geographically distributed e-commerce applications, autonomous systems, or systems of systems. In this talk, we'll analyse two of these concurrency aspects, originating from research on systems of systems: (1) the problem of dynamically changing system configurations, and (2) the challenge of requirements specifications evolving over time. This analysis is done from the perspective of system testing. In this field, some challenges can be more effectively handled, since testing is focused on finite sequences of observations, and therefore restricted to the investigation of safety properties.

* 14:45-15:10 Mario Bravetti, Undecidability of Asynchronous Session Subtyping: the Hunt for Significant Decidable Variants (Based on joint work with Marco Carbone and Gianluigi Zavattaro) 

* 15:10-15:35 Loic Helouet, Combining Free choice and Time in Petri Nets

* 15:35-16:00 IFIP WG 1.8 Business Meeting (Open to Public)  


We welcome highlight talks of 10-15 minutes; talk proposals can be submitted through the TRENDS 2017 EasyChair submission page.  

## Participation

Participation, both to the workshop and to the IFIP WG 1.8 meeting, is open to everybody. For registration, please consult the CONCUR 2017 registration page.

## Organizers


Ilaria Castellani (INRIA Sophia Antipolis, France)
Mohammad Mousavi (University of Leicester, UK and Halmstad University, Sweden)
 
## IFIP WG 1.8 on Concurrency Theory

The aims of IFIP WG 1.8 on Concurrency Theory are:
 
* To develop theoretical foundations of concurrency, exploring frontiers of existing theoretical models like process algebra and process calculi, so as to obtain a deeper theoretical understanding of concurrent and parallel systems.
* To promote and coordinate the exchange of information on concurrency theory, by sharing ideas, discussing open problems, and identifying future directions of research in the area.
The activities of this WG encompass all aspects of concurrency theory and its applications.
More information on IFIP WG 1.8 can be found on its home page.

## History

The first instalment of TRENDS (TRENDS 2012) was held on September 8, 2012 as a satellite event of CONCUR 2012, in Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
The second instalment of TRENDS (TRENDS 2013) was held on August 31, 2013 as a satellite event of CONCUR 2013, in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
The third instalment of TRENDS (TRENDS 2014) was held on September 6, 2014 as a satellite event of CONCUR 2014, in Rome, Italy.
The fourth instalment of TRENDS (TRENDS 2015) was held on September 6, 2015 as a satellite event of CONCUR 2015, in Madrid, Spain.
The fifth instalment of TRENDS (TRENDS 2016) was held on August 27, 2016 as a satellite event of CONCUR 2016, in Quebec City, Canada.
 